The security of the Android unlock pattern lock screen

Android phones are more just then phones, they are portable mini computers.
They not only serve us to make calls but people also check email, Facebook,
access messenger services, browse the internet and do many more on these 
devices. As a result they contain a lot of private and/or business information
that must be protected from prying eyes (or at least highly recommended). For
this reason the security of the locking mechanism of the phone has more
importance then before.

On Android smart phones there several options to lock the phone. Slide, pattern,
pin and password. The slide option offers no security, it only prevents
accidental actions on the phone just like the simple key combination on the old 
phones. The pattern unlock screen contains 9 dots in a 3x3 matrix. In order to 
unlock the phone some dots have to be connected in a certain order. This is a 
new, previously unused method and protects the phone from unauthorized access.
Pin code is a number combination while the password is alphanumerical 
combination that has to be entered into the phone in order to unlock it. These
also protect the phone from unauthorized access.

The math for the PIN/password security methods is well known, but except for one 
site (that has incorrect and incomplete calculations) I could not find anything 
meaningful on pattern security. Since in my experience people use either 
the slide or the pattern (including myself) to lock the phone and maybe pin,
I wanted to know actually how secure my data is. I will not take into 
consideration the password unlock here since it is too impractical for everyday 
use.

The Android unlock pattern.

The Android unlock pattern has 9 dots on the screen organized in a 3x3 matrix.
To unlock the phone a so called pattern has to be drawn on the screen, which
means connecting certain points in a certain order. So how many valid patterns
are there? For this lets first observe the rules of pattern drawing:
- at minimum 4 dots have to be used
- at maximum 9 dots can be used
- one dot can be used only once
- the order in which the dots are connected matters
- dots are connected with a straight line (all points on the path of the
  line get connected)

The last rule introduces some conditional connection paths. When connecting two
points with a straight line it is valid only if there is no unused
point in the way. For example: you cannot connect points 1 and 3 unless point
2 is already is used. So by default drawing a line from 1 to 3 will result in
the pattern 1->2->3. However if point 2 is used the transition 1->3 becomes
valid, such as in 2->1->3.

Also what some people seem to omit is that connecting points in a slight
diagonal is possible (especially on Android 4, since the dots became smaller)
such as 2->7.

Pattern security analysis (compared with PIN)

To find out what and how many patterns there are I have written a small
program. It also can be used to generate random patterns for you to use on
your device (the same way pwgen is used for password generation for computers).

First let us see the numbers (both raw and derived data).

[Look at spreadsheet data]

Let us compare the security of the pattern unlock to the old school PIN code.

As you can see for a given number of dots there are much fewer combinations
than for the same amount of numbers when used in a PIN code. However it is 
compensated for by limiting the speed and amount of tries. The phone allows
5 tries before suspending the lock screen for 30 seconds (both PIN and pattern). 
The limit for pattern tries is set to 20 before it locks the user out completely
and asks for the Google account and password. For PIN I don't see any limits or
at least it is set to a high value (after 60 wrong codes I'm still not locked 
out).

The table above shows that by using patterns that are at least five dots long
the random brute force success rate is well below 1%. Not taking into account
other factors (e.g. smudge on the screen, frequently used patterns & numbers),
we can say that the 5 dot long pattern is similar in strength to a 4 digit PIN
combination and a 7 dot long pattern is similar in strength to a 5 digit PIN
combination. However a 6 digit PIN is already more secure then all the
patterns combined together.

However life is not purely mathematical so let's consider factors not
accounted for previously. 

Most (all?) of the touch screens will retain a smudge from the fingers after
usage. Sometimes it is just chaos but if the unlock pattern is used regularly
the patterns path can be seen viewed from certain angles. This is also the case
for the PIN mode. Dots on the screen can be seen at the locations of the numbers.
This will tell the attacker what dots/numbers are used. In the case of the PIN
the attacker is not really helped out since the length of the PIN is still
unknown to him, so there is still a lot of possibilities (since one number can
be used multiple times). 

In the case of pattern unlock the used dots will be known and thus the number of
patterns reduced significantly. In the table above one can see the distribution
of pattern counts for different dot counts. For 4 long patterns for a given dot
choice at maximum there will be 24 patterns, but what is worse for some choices
there are only 2 valid patterns! 

This means that given 20 tires with the smudge the attacker can get access to
the device with a high probability. The situation is slightly better for 5 dot
long patterns, somehow acceptable for 6 length patterns and goes beyond 1%
with 7 dots or more. An pattern path smudge (or a final patterns seen over the
shoulder) will significantly reduce the security of the pattern unlock mechanism.

Of course the smudge can be avoided by wiping the screen from time to time and
over the shoulder peeking by disabling the path visibility in the settings (in
this case the pattern is not drawn on the screen while unlocking).

Conclusion

The pattern unlock mechanism is an acceptable compromise between security and 
comfort of the user. Still it is much weaker then the PIN unlock, so if you
have important and/or sensitive data on the phone I still suggest using the
good old PIN method.
